AI #866: Add 1.2 changes to the changelog (#867)
FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec: CHANGELOG.md

Author: Add line item at top for "added supported features".  Will add new supported features one by one in the future, but won't list complete list in this release's changelog.

Author: "Changed document structure of appendix X".

Author: Added appropriate lines.  Resolving.

  - Revised requirement of value range to allow any valid decimal value.
- `CommitmentDiscountUnit`
  - Revised requirement of nullability to be tied to the nullability of CommitmentDiscountQuantity (e.g., must be null when CommitmentDiscountQuantity is null).
- `ConsumedQuantity`
  - Revised requirement of value range to allow any valid decimal value.
- `ConsumedUnit`
  - Revised requirement of nullability to be tied to the nullability of ConsumedQuantity (e.g., must be null when ConsumedQuantity is null).
- `EffectiveCost`
  - Clarified requirements for aggregation of values.
- `PricingUnit`
  - Revised requirement of nullability to be tied to the nullability of PricingQuantity (e.g., must be null when PricingQuantity is null).
- `RegionName`
  - Revised requirement of nullability to be tied to the nullability of RegionId (e.g., must be null when RegionId is null).
- `ResourceId`
  - Revised requirement for uniqueness: the value must be unique within the provider.
- `ServiceName`
  - Added requirement for mapping the value to a single ServiceCategory or "Other".
  - Added recommendation for mapping the value to a single ServiceSubcategory or "Other".

> - `SkuId`

Author: @flanakin @kk09v @ijurica 
Please have a look at SkuId, SkuMeter, SkuPriceDetails, and SkuPriceId and confirm that the changes as summarized here are complete and accurate depictions of the changes as applied in those column definitions!

Author: I'll assume you all like the summaries the way they are!  Resolving.

  - Revised column definition to position SkuId as a stable, functional identifier beyond pricing constructs.
  - Revised requirement for presence: the value must be present when the provider supports unit pricing and publishes price lists.
  - Added requirements for a SkuId to be consistent across variations of billing accounts, contracts, and prices.
- `SkuMeter`
  - Revised requirement for presence: the value must be present when the provider supports unit pricing and publishes price lists.
- `SkuPriceDetails`
  - Defined a set of FOCUS-specified property names and units, and added requirements for how they are used.
  - Added requirement that custom properties must prefix names with "x_".
  - Revised requirement for presence: the value must be present when the provider supports unit pricing and publishes price lists.
- `SkuPriceId`

>   - Revised requirement for presence: the value must be present when the provider supports unit pricing and publishes price lists.

Reviewer: something to consider (especially the first one):

```suggestion
  - Revised requirement for presence: the value must be present when the provider supports unit pricing and publishes price lists.
    - Revised requirement for mapping the value to a single SkuId, removing the prior exception for commitment discount flexibility.
    - Added requirement for value association with a given resource or service when ChargeCategory is "Usage" or "Purchase".
```

Author: Works for me, but I prefer to the following verbiage tweaks:

```suggestion
  - Revised requirement for presence: the value must be present when the provider supports unit pricing and publishes price lists.
  - Revised requirement that the value must have a single parent SkuId, removing the prior exception for commitment discount flexibility.
  - Added requirement that the value must be associated with a given resource or service when ChargeCategory is "Usage" or "Purchase".
```

Author: Committing suggestion and resolving.

- `AvailabilityZone`
  - Added a requirement that the value must be null when a charge is not specific to an availability zone.
- `BilledCost`
  - Added requirement that the value must be 0 when payments are received by a third-party (e.g., marketplace).
  - Added requirement that the sum of BilledCost for an Invoice ID must match the payable amount on a corresponding invoice.
- `BillingAccountName`
  - Removed requirement of uniqueness within a customer context.
- `CapacityReservationId`
  - Added requirement to conform to StringHandling attribute.
- `ChargeDescription`
  - Added requirement to conform to StringHandling attribute.
  - Changed recommendation to specify maximum length in the Metadata Schema instead of publicly available documentation.
- `CommitmentDiscountId`
  - Added requirement to conform to StringHandling attribute.
- `CommitmentDiscountQuantity`
  - Revised requirement of value range to allow any valid decimal value.
- `CommitmentDiscountType`
  - Added requirement to conform to StringHandling attribute.
- `CommitmentDiscountUnit`
  - Added requirement to conform to StringHandling attribute.

>   - Revised requirement to nullability: the value must be null when CommitmentDiscountQuantity is null and vice versa.

Author: - Revised requirement of nullability to be tied to the nullability of CommitmentDiscountQuantity (e.g., must be null when PricingQuantity is null).

- `ConsumedQuantity`
  - Revised requirement of value range to allow any valid decimal value.
- `ConsumedUnit`
  - Added requirement to conform to StringHandling attribute.

>   - Revised requirement to nullability: the value must be null when ConsumedQuantity is null and vice versa.

Author: - Revised requirement of nullability to be tied to the nullability of ConsumedQuantity (e.g., must be null when PricingQuantity is null).

- `EffectiveCost`
  - Clarified requirements for aggregation of values.
- `InvoiceIssuerName`
  - Clarified the definition by narrowing the scope to the issuance of payable invoices.
  - Added requirement to conform to StringHandling attribute.
- `PricingUnit`
  - Added requirement to conform to StringHandling attribute.

>   - Revised requirement to nullability: the value must be null when PricingQuantity is null and vice versa.

Author: ```suggestion
  - Revised requirement of nullability to be tied to the nullability of PricingQuantity (e.g., must be null when PricingQuantity is null).
```

- `ProviderName`

>   - Added requirement to conform to StringHandling attribute.

Author: Strike all lines related to StringHandling, as they are not material changes.

- `PublisherName`
  - Added requirement to conform to StringHandling attribute.
- `RegionId`
  - Added requirement to conform to StringHandling attribute.
- `RegionName`
  - Added requirement to conform to StringHandling attribute.

>   - Revised requirement to nullability: the value must be null when RegionId is null and vice versa.

Author: ```suggestion
  - Revised requirement of nullability to be tied to the nullability of RegionId (e.g., must be null when PricingQuantity is null).
```

- `ResourceId`
  - Added requirement to conform to StringHandling attribute.
  - Revised requirement for uniqueness: the value must be unique within the provider.
- `ResourceName`
  - Added requirement to conform to StringHandling attribute.
  - Revised requirement to nullability: the value must be null when ResourceId is null or when the resource does not have an assigned display, and must not be null otherwise.
- `ResourceType`
  - Added requirement to conform to StringHandling attribute.
- `ServiceName`
  - Added requirement to conform to StringHandling attribute.

>   - Added requirements for mapping to a single ServiceCategory or "Other".
>   - Added recommendations for mapping to a single ServiceSubcategory or "Other".

Author: ```suggestion
  - Added requirement for mapping the value to a single ServiceCategory or "Other".
  - Added recommendation for mapping the value to a single ServiceSubcategory or "Other".
```

> - `ServiceSubcategory`
>   - Removed (i.e., relocated) requirement for ServiceName mapping to a single ServiceCategory (or 'Other').

Author: ```suggestion
```

- `SkuId`

>   - Revised column definition positions SkuId as a stable, functional identifier beyond pricing construct.

Author: ```suggestion
  - Revised column definition to position SkuId as a stable, functional identifier beyond pricing constructs.
```

>   - TODO

Author: ```suggestion
  - Revised requirement for presence: the value must be present when the provider supports unit pricing and publishes price lists.
  - Added requirements for a SkuId to be consistent across variations of billing accounts, contracts, and prices.
```

- `SkuMeter`
  - Revised column presence requirement: the column must be present when the provider supports unit pricing and publishes price lists.
  - Added requirement to conform to StringHandling attribute.
- `SkuPriceDetails`

>   - Defined a set of FOCUS-specified property names and units.

Author: ```suggestion
  - Defined a set of FOCUS-specified property names and units, and added requirements for how they are used.
```

  - Added requirement that custom properties must prefix names with "x_".

>   - TODO

Author: ```suggestion
  - Revised requirement for presence: the value must be present when the provider supports unit pricing and publishes price lists.
```

- `SkuPriceId`

>   - TODO

Author: ```suggestion
  - Revised requirement for presence: the value must be present when the provider supports unit pricing and publishes price lists.
  - Added requirements for a SkuPriceId to be consistent across variations of billing accounts and contracts.
```

- `SubAccountId`
  - Added requirement that custom properties must prefix names with "x_".
- `SubAccountName`
  - Added requirement that custom properties must prefix names with "x_".

>   - Revised requirement to nullability: the value must be null when SubAccountId is null and vice versa.

Author: ```suggestion
  - Revised requirement of nullability to be tied to the nullability of SubAccountId (e.g., must be null when SubAccountId is null).
```

The format is based on [Keep a Changelog](https://keepachangelog.com/en/1.1.0/).

## v1.2

<sup>Announced June 2025</sup>

### Added

#### New columns

- `BillingAccountType`
- `InvoiceID`
- `PricingCurrency`
- `PricingCurrencyContractedUnitPrice`
- `PricingCurrencyEffectiveCost`
- `PricingCurrencyListUnitPrice`
- `SubAccountType`

#### New appendix entries

- Added examples for commitment discount flexibility
- Added examples for SaaS scenarios

#### New supported features

- Added list of features the specification supports.  See the `supported_features` subfolder for a full list.

#### New Metadata
- `schema.column_definitions.Deprecated`
- `schema.column_definitions.PreviousColumnName`

### Changed

#### Changed columns

> - Normative requirements guidelines have been applied to all columns.

Author: ```suggestion
- Normative requirements guidelines have been applied to all columns. While the formatting has changed significantly, the vast majority of such changes are not material unless specifically called out in the below list.
```

The format is based on [Keep a Changelog](https://keepachangelog.com/en/1.1.0/).

## v1.2

<sup>Announced June 2025</sup>

### Added

#### New columns

- `BillingAccountType`
- `InvoiceID`
- `PricingCurrency`
- `PricingCurrencyContractedUnitPrice`
- `PricingCurrencyEffectiveCost`
- `PricingCurrencyListUnitPrice`
- `SubAccountType`

#### New appendix entries

- Added examples for commitment discount flexibility
- Added examples for SaaS scenarios

#### New supported features

- Added list of features the specification supports.  See the `supported_features` subfolder for a full list.

#### New metadata column definition properties

> - `schema.column_definitions.Deprecated`
> - `schema.column_definitions.PreviousColumnName`

Author: @rileyjenk The convention from the 1.1 release was to call out the metadata sections explicitly.  So does this work for you, if the header is `New metadata column definition properties`, as it was in 1.1?

```suggestion
- `Deprecated`
- `PreviousColumnName`
```

Author: Committing this and resolving.

  - Revised requirement to nullability: the value must be null when CommitmentDiscountQuantity is null and vice versa.
- `ConsumedQuantity`
  - Revised requirement of value range to allow any valid decimal value.
- `ConsumedUnit`
  - Added requirement to conform to StringHandling attribute.
  - Revised requirement to nullability: the value must be null when ConsumedQuantity is null and vice versa.
- `EffectiveCost`
  - Clarified requirements for aggregation of values.
- `SkuPriceDetails`
  - Defined a set of FOCUS-specified property names and units.
  - Added requirement that custom properties must prefix names with "x_".
- `Tags`
  - Resolved bug involving multiple user-defined tag structures.

#### Changed attributes

- `ColumnNamingAndOrdering`
  - Renamed attribute to `ColumnHandling`.
- `CurrencyCodeFormat`
  - Renamed attribute to `CurrencyFormat`.
  - Augmented definition to handle for virtual currencies.

#### Changed appendix entries

- Revised the ordering of appendix entries.
- Moved appendix examples to CSV section.

#### Changed metadata

##### Changed metadata properties

- `ProviderVersion`
  - Renamed field to `DataGeneratorVersion`.

> ##### Changed metadata schema properties

Author: @rileyjenk Anything to add to this section?  Or should we strike it?

Author: No response from @rileyjenk.  Resolving and striking this section.

> ##### Changed metadata column definition properties

Author: @rileyjenk Anything to add to this section?  Or should we strike it?

Author: No response from @rileyjenk.  Resolving and striking this section.

<sup>Announced June 2025</sup>

### Added

#### New columns

- `BillingAccountType`
- `InvoiceID`
- `PricingCurrency`
- `PricingCurrencyContractedUnitPrice`
- `PricingCurrencyEffectiveCost`
- `PricingCurrencyListUnitPrice`
- `SubAccountType`

#### New appendix entries

- Added examples for commitment discount flexibility
- Added examples for SaaS scenarios

#### New supported features

- Added list of features the specification supports.  See the `supported_features` subfolder for a full list.

### Changed

#### Changed columns

- Normative requirements guidelines have been applied to all columns.
- `AvailabilityZone`

>   - Added a requirement that it must be null when a charge is not specific to an availability zone.

Author: ```suggestion
  - Added a requirement that the value must be null when a charge is not specific to an availability zone.
```

- `BilledCost`

>   - Added requirement that BilledCost must be 0 when payments are received by a third-party (e.g., marketplace).

Author: ```suggestion
  - Added requirement that the value must be 0 when payments are received by a third-party (e.g., marketplace).
```

  - Enforced a tighter and more granular constraint on the sum of BilledCost — per individual invoice, not just per period/account.

> - `BillingAccountId`
>   - Relaxed the uniqueness requirement from globally unique to provider-unique.
>   - Introduced a recommendation to use fully-qualified identifiers.

Author: ```suggestion
```

- `BillingAccountName`

>   - Removed uniqueness requirement within a customer context.

Author: ```suggestion
  - Removed requirement of uniqueness within a customer context.
```

> - `BillingCurrency`
>   - Added a requirement that it must be expressed in national currency (e.g., USD, EUR).

Author: ```suggestion
```

> - `BillingPeriodEnd`
>   - Clarified the requirement to specify it as the exclusive end bound of the billing period.
> - `BillingPeriodStart`
>   - Clarified the requirement to specify it as the inclusive start bound of the billing period.

Author: ```suggestion
```

- `CapacityReservationId`

>   - Clarified nullability requirements.
>   - Added StringHandling conformance requirements.

Author: ```suggestion
  - Added requirement to conform to StringHandling.
```

> - `CapacityReservationStatus`
>   - Clarified nullability requirements.
>   - Explicitly defined allowed values for unused and used capacity reservations.

Author: ```suggestion
```

> - `ChargeClass`
>   - Clarified nullability requirements.

Author: ```suggestion
```

> - `ChargeDescription`
>   - Added StringHandling conformance requirements.
>   - Changed recommendation to specify maximum length in the Metadata Schema instead of publicly available documentation.

Author: ```suggestion
- `ChargeDescription`
  - Added requirement to conform to StringHandling attribute.
  - Changed recommendation to specify maximum length in the Metadata Schema instead of publicly available documentation.
```

> - `ChargePeriodEnd`
>   - Clarified the requirement to specify it as the exclusive end bound of the effective period of the charge.
> - `ChargePeriodStart`
>   - Clarified the requirement to specify it as the inclusive start bound of the effective period of the charge.

Author: ```suggestion
```

- `CommitmentDiscountId`
  - Added StringHandling conformance requirements.

> - `CommitmentDiscountQuantity`
>   - Clarified nullability requirements.
>   - Replaced the explicit requirement for positive values with a general requirement for valid decimal values when not null.

Author: ```suggestion
- `CommitmentDiscountQuantity`
  - Revised requirement of value range to allow any valid decimal value.
```

- `CommitmentDiscountType`
  - Must be a consistent, readable display value.

>   - Added StringHandling conformance requirements.

Author: ```suggestion
  - Added requirement to conform to StringHandling attribute.
```

- `CommitmentDiscountUnit`
  - Added StringHandling conformance requirements.
  - Revised nullability requirements, explicitly stating that it must be null when CommitmentDiscountQuantity is null and vice versa.
  - Added reference to Commitment Discount Flexibility appendix.

> - `ConsumedQuantity`
>   - Clarified nullability requirements.
>   - Replaced the explicit requirement for positive values with a general requirement for valid decimal values when not null.

Author: ```suggestion
- `ConsumedQuantity`
  - Revised requirement of value range to allow any valid decimal value.
```

> - `ConsumedUnit`
>   - Added StringHandling conformance requirements.
>   - Revised nullability requirements, explicitly stating that it must be null when ConsumedQuantity is null and vice versa.

Author: ```suggestion
- `ConsumedUnit`
  - Added requirement to conform to StringHandling attribute.
  - Revised requirement to nullability: the value must be null when ConsumedQuantity is null and vice versa.
```

> - `ContractedCost`
>   - Added a requirement that it must be a valid decimal value.

Author: ```suggestion
```

<sup>Announced June 2025</sup>

> ### Added

Author: I've gone with pound-sign headers and subheaders instead of the old convention of bold, and I've eliminated colons to be more in line with the recommendations from [Keep a Changelog](https://keepachangelog.com/en/1.1.0/).  Is this alright with everyone?

Reviewer 2: FYI - The reason I didn't do this before is because you generally want to make headers unique. That may not be important to us here. Just wanted to share that for consideration. I'm good either way.

#### New columns

> - `BillingAccountType`

Author: Our convention appears to have been to exclude spaces for columns but include spaces for attributes and metadata.  Can we change this?  If so, shall we go consistently with spaces or no spaces?

Author: Discussed in Apr 14 Maintainers.  Will strike spaces from attributes.

<sup>Announced June 2025</sup>

### Added

#### New columns

- `BillingAccountType`
- `InvoiceID`
- `SubAccountType`
- `PricingCurrency`
- `PricingCurrencyContractedUnitPrice`
- `PricingCurrencyEffectiveCost`
- `PricingCurrencyListUnitPrice`

### Changed

#### Changed columns

> - Normative requirements guidelines have been applied to all columns.

Author: Add more context to mention that this resulted in a pile of changes, but the vast majority of these are not material.

- `CommitmentDiscountType`
  - Must be a consistent, readable display value.
- `SkuPriceDetails`

>   - Created FOCUS-defined properties.

Author: Sounds good to me.

- `Tags`
  - Resolved bug involving multiple user-defined tag structures.

#### Changed attributes

> - `Column Naming and Ordering`
>   - Column renamed from `Column Handling`.

Reviewer 2: Other way around...
```suggestion
- `Column Naming and Ordering`
  - Attribute renamed to `Column Handling`.
```

Author: Whoops!  That said, my intention was to list the destination column first, then what it was renamed from.  So:
```suggestion
- `Column Handling`
  - Attribute renamed from `Column Naming and Ordering`.
```

Author: Just seeing your other comments now.  Listing previous column first is fine with me if that's our old convention.  Accepting your suggestion.

> - `Currency Format`
>   - Attribute renamed from `Currency Code Format`.

Reviewer 2: I think we use the old name as the main bullet since that's what was changed from the previous release. I'm find either way. Just suggesting this for consistency.
```suggestion
- `Currency Code Format`
  - Attribute renamed to `Currency Format`.
```

  - Definition augmented to handle for virtual currencies.

#### Changed metadata

> ##### Changed metadata properties

Reviewer 3: I added a new added section for the new column_definition metadata sections.

> - `Data Generator Version`
>   - Field renamed from `Provider Version`.

Reviewer 2: Flipping for consistency...
```suggestion
- `Provider Version`
  - Field renamed from `Data Generator Version`.
```

Author: Accepting with a small tweak.

```suggestion
- `Provider Version`
  - Field renamed to `Data Generator Version`.
```

##### Changed metadata schema properties

##### Changed metadata column definition properties

> [All 1.2 changes](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/compare/1.1...working_draft)

Author: @mike-finopsorg Please have a look at this line and make sure it will be functional when we are done for comparing 1.2 to the previous version.

Reviewer 2: It's missing a "v" in the tag name and "working_draft" should be "v1.2" for the official release. We only need working_draft to test before the release. We need to determine when we want to add the correct link. Either now or right before the final release. Perhaps we could add a comment for the test link? 🤔

Feel free to tweak this as desired for the setup you prefer:
```suggestion
[All 1.2 changes](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/compare/v1.1...v1.2)
<!--
Compared to working draft: https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/compare/v1.1...working_draft
Compared to the candidate release: https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/compare/v1.1...v1.2cr
-->
```
FYI - As a test, you can replace "1.1" with "1.0".

Author: Thank you, very helpful!  Hmm.  I think the final version needs to be between v1.1 and v1.2, which is a link that of course won't work until we're totally done.  Let's discuss in the Maintainers meeting.

Author: Discussed in Apr 14 Maintainers.  Will strike compare references from the changelog.

<sup>Announced June 2025</sup>

### Added

#### New columns

- `BillingAccountType`
- `InvoiceID`
- `PricingCurrency`
- `PricingCurrencyContractedUnitPrice`
- `PricingCurrencyEffectiveCost`
- `PricingCurrencyListUnitPrice`
- `SubAccountType`

#### New appendix entries

- Added examples for commitment discount flexibility
- Added examples for SaaS scenarios

#### New supported features

- Added list of features the specification supports.  See the `supported_features` subfolder for a full list.

> 

Author: I added this, but maybe we should leave it out, given it's not hitting the spec itself...?

Author: Discussed in Apr 14 Maintainers.  Will keep.

<sup>Announced June 2025</sup>

### Added

#### New columns

- `BillingAccountType`
- `InvoiceID`
- `PricingCurrency`
- `PricingCurrencyContractedUnitPrice`
- `PricingCurrencyEffectiveCost`
- `PricingCurrencyListUnitPrice`
- `SubAccountType`

#### New appendix entries

- Added examples for commitment discount flexibility
- Added examples for SaaS scenarios

#### New supported features

- Added list of features the specification supports.  See the `supported_features` subfolder for a full list.

### Changed

#### Changed columns

- Normative requirements guidelines have been applied to all columns.
- `BilledCost`
  - Added requirement that BilledCost must be 0 when payments are received by a third-party (e.g., marketplace).
- `CommitmentDiscountType`

>   - Must be a consistent, readable display value.

Author: I don't see this addition in the list of normative requirements.  Did we miss adding something, or do we strike this from the changelog?

- `BillingAccountName`
  - Removed requirement of uniqueness within a customer context.
- `CapacityReservationId`
  - Added requirement to conform to StringHandling attribute.
- `ChargeDescription`
  - Added requirement to conform to StringHandling attribute.
  - Changed recommendation to specify maximum length in the Metadata Schema instead of publicly available documentation.
- `CommitmentDiscountId`
  - Added requirement to conform to StringHandling attribute.
- `CommitmentDiscountQuantity`
  - Revised requirement of value range to allow any valid decimal value.
- `CommitmentDiscountType`
  - Added requirement to conform to StringHandling attribute.
- `CommitmentDiscountUnit`
  - Added requirement to conform to StringHandling attribute.
  - Revised requirement to nullability: the value must be null when CommitmentDiscountQuantity is null and vice versa.
- `ConsumedQuantity`
  - Revised requirement of value range to allow any valid decimal value.
- `ConsumedUnit`
  - Added requirement to conform to StringHandling attribute.
  - Revised requirement to nullability: the value must be null when ConsumedQuantity is null and vice versa.
- `EffectiveCost`

>   - Clarified requirements for aggregation of values.

Author: @ijurica and I got as far as adding columns through EffectiveCost.  We will meet again tomorrow to continue adding the rest.

Author: Met and added!  Resolving.

> | BilledCost                   | 0.5                     |                   |

Author: At what point can we strike old column names from this list?  Do we need to carry `AmortizedCost` in this table in perpetuity?

Author: Discussed with @ijurica.  Could we potentially strike any columns from this list prior to 1.0 (i.e., 0.5 and 1.0-preview), given that no provider has (or likely shall ever) implement those versions?

Author: Discussed in Apr 14 Maintainers.  Didn't have agreement; will leave as-is and potentially revisit in the future.
